Renovate Wisely: Where to Spend & What to Save On
URL: https://qanvast.com/sg/articles/renovate-wisely-where-to-spend-what-to-save-on-1157
Date: October 08, 2024

Plan your renovation wisely!

Budgeting for a home renovation can prove to be tricky, especially if you're torn between depleting your savings and getting the home that you've always wanted. While it's good to invest in fundamentals such as good quality flooring, fixtures, and craftsmanship, there are some things you want but not necessarily need for the home.

To avoid busting your renovation budget, or to see what you should prioritise, it's good to assess whether you should splurge or save on these common big-ticket items…

RENOVATION WORKS TO SAVE ON:

Limewash and microcement

While they add texture and are more visually appealing than painted walls, the truth is that both microcement and limewash can be expensive, especially when compared to regular paint.

The reason for the higher cost lies in the application process. Applying limewash and microcement are much more labour-intensive, with the painters required to undergo specific training courses and learning the specific brushstroke needed – which, by the way, is more time-consuming than simply using a roller.

Rounded doorways, walls, and surfaces

Arched doorways were a huge interior design trend in 2021, but these days, it has since given way to its more understated relative: rounded surfaces.

Aside from adding softness to the space, it can be a safer alternative to regular straight-edged carpentry if you have young children. But for other homeowners like DINKs and singles who may not have a functional use for such a feature, we'd suggest skipping if you're on an especially tight budget, as the additional work required to fabricate them results in higher costs.

Kitchen backsplash

Seduced by pictures of gorgeous kitchens with funky backsplashes? Remember that your kitchen will function just the same without a fancy backsplash! Since most homes come with finished kitchens, it might not be worth spending more on retiling works to achieve this minor aesthetic feature.

Platform bed

Having a platform bed without a base and almost flushed with the floor may seem ideal if you're after a Zen-like, minimalist look. But getting out of this bed every day is going to be inconvenient – and even tougher when you age or get pregnant!

Perhaps a more functional alternative would be to place the bed on a wider raised platform, which offers discreet storage compartments and achieves a similar look. This, however, is not allowed in HDB flats where the space underneath the platform can't be sealed with cement or other materials, nor can it be used for storage.

Bathtub

Sure, having a bathtub at home allows you to soak in and enjoy some holiday-like downtime without any travelling. But unless you plan to do that every day, stick to a standing shower that cuts back on water consumption, and takes half the effort to clean.

Built-in TV feature wall

While a built-in TV feature wall provides ample storage space and adds visual pizzazz, we'd only recommend this to those with extra room in their budget, or those who see themselves shifting their furniture around.

Not only does it limit your flexibility with your furniture layout, it will also incur extra carpentry costs. If you really want to make your living room pop, perhaps consider coating your walls with a distinct paint colour – something that stands out against the overall aesthetic.

Fluted panels

We admit, fluted panels do look stunning, but the truth is that they can be a pain to clean. All those narrow grooves create extra surfaces for dust to settle on (which means more to clean), and trying to fit your cleaning tool into said grooves may prove more troublesome than you anticipated.

RENOVATION WORKS TO SPEND ON:

Hacking walls/layout changes

Changing a home's configuration is a big decision – one that often involves the costly act of demolishing certain walls. On the bright side, this move has the potential to dramatically improve the look and feel of the space.

But consider whether the home needs to function differently in the future before bringing down those walls. For example, you might want to keep that small study instead of using it to expand the living room if you think you'd need some extra storage space in the years ahead.

For the best of both worlds, do a half hack by replacing the top half of the room's walls with glass panels. This enables the home to look larger with more natural light passing through but still keeps the room semi-private.

Note, however, that not all walls can be hacked. To be sure, check out this guide on how to read and interpret your HDB floor plan, or speak with your MCST should you live in a condo.

Kitchen island or peninsula

In a busy area like the kitchen, you need as much countertop space as you can get – which is why we'd say it's a worthy expenditure for your home renovation.

Aside from the practical benefits – like providing extra workstop surfaces and storage space for your things – it can also bring your household together by functioning as a gathering point within your home, thus promoting family bonding.

Walk-in wardrobe

If you have the luxury of extra space at home, a walk-in wardrobe is a worthy investment as it provides a ton of storage for things other than your clothes. Have compartments customised for accessories like your vacuum cleaner, luggage, ironing board, or any odd-shaped belongings to fully maximize the space.

Custom carpentry

In space-starved Singapore, there's always going to be a struggle for space, especially at home. But having too many built-ins risks making your home feel cramped and boxed-in, which is why you should get creative with your carpentry to create enough storage room while keepig the look neat.

From bay window areas that can double up as platform storage and seating to tables that can be tucked away when needed, these custom carpentry ideas may be just what you need to streamline the look and fully maximise every inch of space in your home.

Large format tiles

It may be costlier than regular tiles, but large format tiles are a popular choice among homeowners for a reason.

Other than creating a more seamless, clutter-free look, their bigger size means fewer grout lines, which subsequently lessens the amount of cleaning you need to do. It's a worthy investment, if you ask us!

Quality mechanisms like hinges and drawer tracks

Sure, mechanisms like hinges, knobs, and drawer tracks may be small in the grand scheme of your home renovation, but trust us when we say that they're something you shouldn't overlook.

Think about it this way: they're the linchpins that ensure the bigger features – like your doors and cabinets – work the way they should. Skimp on them, and you'll be dealing with rust, breakage, or creaky doors whenever you interact with said features (e.g. when you're entering a room, or opening a drawer to store your things).
