Everything You Need to Know About Kitchen Backsplashes
URL: https://qanvast.com/sg/articles/everything-you-need-to-know-about-kitchen-backsplashes-1907
Date: April 12, 2024

From why it's necessary to choosing the right one.

The kitchen is one of the most hardworking places in the home, which is why planning out the space will go a long way in increasing its efficiency.

That said, kitchen countertops and kitchen cabinetry are always in the spotlight (which is understandable given that these installations should match design and lifestyle needs) but a kitchen backsplash should not be glossed over. Today, we answer all your pressing questions about it.

1. What is a kitchen backsplash and is it necessary?

First things first: a kitchen backsplash is a vertical panel installed behind your work stations (i.e. your sinks and cookers). It usually covers the area of the wall between the countertop and cabinets, but can be extended as high as the ceiling.

As a space that sees loads of spills, grease splatter and is quite humid, kitchen walls can become quite damaged over time. The purpose of the kitchen backsplash is therefore to protect them from deterioration and ease maintenance efforts but has recently become an added focal point for homes.

2. When should kitchen backsplashes be installed?

As a general rule of thumb, backsplashes should be installed after your countertop is fixed up (especially in the case of granite and solid surfaces). The reason being that there's a need to grout (where applicable), seal and caulk to really prevent water from seeping into any hairline cracks and causing mould growth.

3. What's the best kitchen backsplash material to use?

Some materials used for backsplashes include tempered glass, tiles, solid panels, quartz, sintered stone and stainless steel. Needless to say, they all have their pros and cons.

Tempered Glass
Pros: Strong, durable, easy to clean, harder and less likely to scratch. Heat resistant.
Cons: Installation can be tricky – building around power sockets may cause the glass panels to have break lines, which makes it less seamless and can trap dust.

Tiles
Pros: Versatile, non-porous, easy to install plus maintain, resistant to scratches and heat. Loads of designs and finishes to choose from; can be mixed and matched to create new looks. Relatively good price points. Additional grout lines, which adds to style factor.
Cons: Grout lines require regular cleaning, which is exacerbated if small tiles (more grout lines) are chosen.

Solid Panels
Pros: Pocket-friendly, durable and holds shape well. Scratch-, heat-resistant and waterproof. Simple to install plus matching panels for your countertop that can be mounted over existing finishes without hacking for a polished look. Multipurpose: Can also be installed on floors, walls and furniture.
Cons: Designs are a little limited. Not entirely heat resistant, direct application of hot cookware may cause it to discolour. Joint lines may show.

Quartz/Sintered Stone
Pros: Non-porous, can be cleaned with warm soap water and is one of the more forgiving materials. Comes in large panels, which results in less visible joint lines. Has the luxe look of natural stone, but with superior resistance properties.
Cons: Can be expensive.

Note: While the two materials may look similar, there are nuanced differences between the two.

Stainless Steel
Pros: Affordable, heat-resistant, hard-wearing and easy to clean, just wipe with warm water and cloth. Can be fixed to your wall directly with glue or screws. Food-grade options available.
Cons: May dent over time. Not scratch-resistant. Tough to keep pristine as it is prone to discolouration.

4. Are there any tips for matching the backsplash with the rest of the kitchen?

Assuming that you have found your overall style, you should start pinning some ideas and picking your colours. Consider the size of your kitchen when doing this – lighter colours can visually widen the space.

While dark colours can make the kitchen feel warmer.

After narrowing down your choices, order samples or head down to showrooms to have a look and feel in person.

Consider your countertop and cabinet colours before you settle on one. There's also a more updated trend where people match and repeat patterns in other areas of the kitchen such as the floor or island.

Depending on your home's overall palette, you can use your backsplash to juxtapose for a standout look.

5. Which kitchen backsplash material is the easiest to clean and maintain?

Textured or tiled backsplashes generally require more thorough cleaning compared to the other materials listed above. This is because the presence of crevices/grout lines means that the surface isn't smooth/even, serving as recesses for scum to accumulate.

So, if you like the look of tiled backsplashes, consider getting larger format tiles that require fewer grout lines.

That said, all backsplashes regardless of material should be wiped down either after each session of heavy cooking, or at least once a week to prevent the buildup of scum, grease and watermarks. Do also check with your material supplier on the types of cleaning agents that can/cannot be used for each surface, or use gentler cleaning agents (such as plant-based ones) if you're unsure.

Special thanks to the professionals at Synergraphic, Hafary and Para.graph for their insights.

Makeover your kitchen!

But of course, it's also important that you consult a professional on the best backsplash to get for your kitchen based on your lifestyle needs and how the rest of your interior will look like.

(This article was first published on 30 May 2019 and last updated on 12 April 2024.)
